+++
author = "Andrew Freeman"
banner_type = "none"
date = 2015-11-19T11:00:00Z
description = "Discover how Marketing and Sales can move beyond leads and use IT alignment in a global manner."
heading = ""
highlight_colour = "rgb(55, 26, 190)"
image = "https://static.crmtechnologies.com/sites/default/files/Blog---Global-Marketing-&-Sales-alignment.jpg"
intro = "IT alignment between Marketing and Sales must continue beyond bringing in leads. Find out how to work towards global alignment."
keywords = ["IT alignment", "marketing and sales"]
resource = "excellence-hub/sales-marketing-and-it-your-cross-departmental-guide.md"
show_contact = "form"
slug = "global-marketing-sales-alignment-moving-beyond-leads"
subheading = ""
tags = []
testimonial = ""
title = "Global Marketing & Sales Alignment [Moving Beyond Leads]"

+++
The need for better Marketing and Sales alignment has been well documented for several years. It is backed up by early success stories where aligned organisations have reported a [20% rise in annual revenue](http://v1.aberdeen.com/launch/report/research_briefs/8803-RB-Sales-Marketing-Alignment-Collaboration.asp), while those who do not can expect to see a 4% decline.

Up until now, the focus for this coordination has been around leads and adjusting to the internet era where customers can better self-serve and so become ‘sales ready’ at a later stage in the buying journey than before. Now the focus needs to be on IT alignment between the two departments.

Forward-thinking organisations with aligned Sales and Marketing departments agree a plan for how leads are followed up on and more importantly, converted into customers. IT alignment between the departments continues this process **_after_** customer conversion, through data measurement and performance.

## Data and metrics

In a recent study carried out by B2B marketing and sales analysts, [SiriusDecisions](https://www.siriusdecisions.com/What-We-Do.aspx), nearly two in three organisations revealed they were unhappy with their current provision for aligning data generated by Marketing and Sales. Insights continue to be hidden in silos. Where there is an attempt to share learnings, all too often Marketing and Sales are not fully aware of what different types of data might mean to one another. As a result, information such as online activity and interaction with valuable digital content and assets, is not always passed on or combined in a way that Sales can use to its full potential and conversely customer insight from Sales is not rarely fed back to Marketing.   
  
So, the key to further alignment between Marketing and Sales departments is to align IT, improving data analysis with agreed measurements and metrics. Marketing is renowned for measuring factors which other business units may find interesting but do not pay much attention to - from lead conversion rates, return on marketing investment through to softer measurements such as social engagement and brand affinity.

## Define shared goals

To truly progress, Marketing and Sales need to work together to establish core measurement metrics and bring these together through IT alignment. This means they must each understand shared goals and KPIs, such as lead to close rate, lead to opportunity rate, deal velocity, average deal value growth, database reach, engagement and other metrics. All these are areas of measurement are of more interest to key stakeholders and the board and support demonstrating the value of marketing, sales and IT alignment.   
  
In fact, [Aberdeen Consulting](http://v1.aberdeen.com/launch/report/research_briefs/8803-RB-Sales-Marketing-Alignment-Collaboration.asp) shows that those who move beyond sharing leads to nurturing a deeper relationship are nearly twice as likely to be market leaders than those who haven’t yet moved beyond sharing leads.

## Creating an aligned customer strategy

The result is an organisation that can move from empowering Marketing and Sales to be better aligned on leads, to building a fully integrated customer strategy which can open up new insights that were impossible to discover before Marketing and Sales measured the same things in the same way.

This creates a virtuous circle: taking the next step forward for Marketing and Sales alignment ultimately takes both functions back to the start of the process where planning and forecasting are improved for future success.

## Takeaways

* Marketing and Sales need to align beyond leads by working towards measuring and analysing data in the same way.
* Global alignment will be achieved when Marketing and Sales are working towards the same goals.
* Improved planning and forecasting will help to align Marketing and Sales beyond leads and towards quality CRM.

## Discover how Marketing Operations can enable you to move beyond leads by downloading: What the future holds for Marketing Operations and what this means for Sales & IT