+++
author = ""
banner_type = "none"
date = 2011-12-27T23:00:00Z
description = "As social media increasingly becomes accepted as a standard communications channel"
heading = ""
highlight_colour = "rgb(55, 26, 190)"
image = ""
intro = ""
keywords = []
resource = []
show_contact = "form"
slug = "your-content-marketing-social"
subheading = ""
tags = []
testimonial = ""
title = "Is your content marketing social? "

+++
As social media increasingly becomes accepted as a standard communications channel, both for business and personal use, marketers have been honing their skills and exploring how best to tap into this new opportunity for engagement. Inbound marketing techniques have for some time relied on interesting, useful content to attract relevant audiences, but have been focused on capturing interest via websites or email calls to action. In order to be effective in this new dawn of social engagement, marketers need to look closely at the types of content they are using to engage on social networks. Visitors to your website that arrive via social channels will have different expectations from those that click through from organic search results. Social visitors are more likely to be exploring and gathering information, whereas a visitor arriving from an organic search click through is more likely to have a specific requirement to fulfil. Developing appropriate content to engage the social visitor and encourage a return for more information is far more likely to pay dividends in terms of opportunities converted further down the line. Each of the social networks has a slightly different culture and communications expectations vary across the board. With Twitter, followers will be looking for a steady flow of tips and useful information, plus a little personal flavour to your profile in addition to the news and tips. Tweets with links need to direct the user to more 'useful' content or advice and should not include a data capture gateway at the first landing page as this is likely to dissuade the explorer to linger on the site. The tone can be less formal, although not as personal as Facebook, for example. Facebook fans react well to visual content, with pictures and video generating greater interest than words alone. Professional peer networking sites like LinkedIn expect a very professional approach to communication and a more personal contact, whether directly or via groups. Sharing buttons should be prominent on landing pages, making it easy for social visitors to share their discovery and extend the reach of your content to their own networks of contacts. The most important aspect of social media engagement that is universal however is the 'engagement' itself - content should not just be broadcast material but encourage feedback and interaction. Marketers need to develop campaigns that generate opportunities for further engagement, whether requesting ideas for more content, product feedback or surveys or even something less formal like a competition. Content tailored to being more educational and industry-led will be far better received via social media than product information and benefits. How-to articles and white papers have long been established as successful inbound techniques and these can still be leveraged to great benefit, but when used to attract interest via social media channels, these should afford the opportunity for further interaction. Multimedia content is also an increasingly important element, offering the visitor an easy-to-digest, visual version of the useful content. Marketers that embrace the sharing principles of social media and generate appropriate content will reap the rewards of an engaged social community. Remember, social networking is still networking with people; it just happens to be online, giving marketers excellent opportunities to leverage automation tools to extend that network.